On the Women in STEM "Paradox".

A while ago, I found myself in a strange conversation on the internet. People were discussing female representation in STEM, and somebody said the following:

> Are you aware that the most egalitarian societies which exist at the moment have a greater disparity in men’s and women’s choice of career than comparable societies that are less egalitarian?

To which I responded with an enormous post, and then a series of other enormous posts to follow that enormous post. I have now compiled these into a large, edited essay, which goes as follows:

"Most egalitarian" is a weird way of thinking about this kind of thing.

Like, I know what you're talking about, in that there was a study and a bunch of wealthy countries that like to call themselves feminist and had a few "women in STEM" interventions wound up having more female nurses and fewer female engineers than like, Iran does. And then everyone pointed at that study to say "well, women just want to do these things, because when they are given a 'real choice' they tend to do these things".

This notion that this study "proved" the "innate" differences between men and women's preferences doesn't really stand up to scrutiny to me. After all, the question of "why do more women go into nursing and fewer into engineering in Scandinavia in comparison to Iran" can easily be answered in a lot of different ways. The "innate preferences" hypothesis is only one of many. One I am partial to is money.

If you look at the study, it's not just "more feminist countries". It's richer countries. And richer countries where there isn't a great deal of inequality. That is to say, countries that have a fairly high GDP per capita and median income.

If you look at societies throughout history, you will find that richer places are persistently more sexist, even within a society.

A family of serfs will have their daughters working in the field just as much as their sons, because they are serfs and the work needs to get done. A family of nobles may not even allow their daughters outside, for fear it may damage their beautiful complexion. Peasant women often worked all sorts of jobs, while noble women's job was to bear children and be beautifully entertaining.

When you have more money, you can afford to have a whole chunk of your population doing unpaid labour that doesn't contribute to the household income. Places that can afford to have stay-at-home moms are more likely to have stay-at-home moms.

When you have more money, you make getting more money less of a priority (unless you're a CEO who counts status with dollars). More women in Iran are engineers because more women in Iran prioritize getting money, and more women in Iran prioritize money because more of them don't have it because the GDP per capita of Iran is much lower than that of Norway.

It's not actually a "more free" choice, if there are still sexist ideas in the society no matter what laws have been passed. It's just a choice with a different set of incentives. If going through the engineering program is already a hassle due to the pre-existing overwhelming presence of men there, then the payoff needs to be pretty high for you to decide to go do it anyway. And the payoff is less comparatively high in countries with stable welfare states, high median incomes and high GDP per capita.

If we assume women are rational beings who prefer higher payoffs over lower payoffs, and who dislike certain social environments due to pre-existing social norms, such that if one scenario requires them to spend time in those environments that counts as a cost and reduces that scenario's payoff... This isn't a paradox. This is literally what the expected outcome would be, even assuming zero "innate female preference" for "care" careers and zero differences in male and female skill distributions. Add in the fact that those skill distributions do exist (in my opinion because of biases in early childhood treatment), and the already almost certain outcome just becomes more entrenched into the society, irrespective of how many Women In Stem ad campaigns you have.

Men and women obviously have different preferences. I believe preferences are shaped by society, though. They prefer different things because they are provided with different incentives, rewarded for different things since childhood, etc. And even if I didn't, I think that "there are innate differences between the sexes when it comes to preferences" is a hypothesis.

A hypothesis that needs to stand up to scrutiny, a hypothesis that needs to have greater explanatory power than the null hypothesis of that not being a thing, a hypothesis that requires evidence.

As far as I can tell, almost everyone who cites that study treats it as though it's unambiguous evidence of innate female preferences. And it's just not. There are other hypotheses that have similar explanatory power, like the one I provided. So to me it sounds like it's just confirmation bias talking. I never hear about people who argue for the hypothesis of "innate preference differences" talk about falsifying it. They always talk about verifying it. And that's not how a good model works. You don't prove a hypothesis stands up to scrutiny by coddling it.

You could look at the same study and find a pretty damning bit of evidence against the "innate preference differences" hypothesis. Namely that different societies and the same society at different times feature(d) different distributions of skills, demonstrated preferences in term of career choice, educational attainment, etc, between the sexes.

If there is that much variation (and there is that much variation. That's why you can compare Norway to Iran in the first place, because there is variation), then that's a pretty solid argument for environmental as opposed to innate differences. After all, you don't find different cultures where the men are on average shorter than the women. You don't find different cultures where the men on average have smaller hands than the women. You don't find different cultures where men are on average less naturally hairy than women. Those are innate differences.

If the proportion of women in a field varies from 3% in one country to 30% in another country, to 70% in a third country... it's not fucking genetics that's responsible for that variation. It's environment.

See, there's even an extra layer: "innate personality differences" is a different thing from "innate preference differences in terms of career choice". And the personalities we usually associate with careers exist because of stereotypes, selection bias ("people who are obsessive and precise go into Computer Science more often because they believe they are more likely to succeed and people who are not avoid it because they believe they are not") and then reinforcement from the status quo ("I'm not gonna go into computer science, everyone there is obsessive and annoying" <- this is not a judgement on skills or aptitude on the part of the speaker, but on the social environment, see: what I said about costs in my first post in this thread).

You could imagine a scenario where there are differences in personality between the sexes (usually studies show differences in propensity for competition and conscientiousness)... But no differences in labor participation across careers. Whether that is because there's some sort of enforced quota, or because careers aren't made out to be some thing that "reflects your soul" and instead are just a thing you do for money.

You know, like in Russia, where women are a much greater presence in STEM, despite feminism being far less directly emphasized than in Scandinavian countries (https://www.google.com/amp/s/www.bbc.com/news/amp/business-39579321). Interesting how early childhood interventions in the form of equal treatment and encouraging an interest in STEM at an early age increases career participation regardless of other forms of sexism.

>I do think you’re assuming quite a few things though. These countries we’re talking about aren’t just richer, they also have less inequality in terms of men having all the money and higher paying jobs.

Less inequality how?

We know they have more inequality in terms of STEM majors than the poorer countries. There's less inequality over different classes, (see: gini coefficient, I guess) but the premise of this situation is that there's more inequality, that's what the "paradox" means. If you mean in terms of "the same jobs with the same hours don't have as much of a pay gap and men get promoted roughly as often as women in when they exhibit certain traits or skills"... that's a different question. And one that is much further removed from the major-choosing decision. Which is relevant if we're discussing the reasons why someone makes such a choice, because the further removed a certain feature is, the less salient it will be to the choice-maker.

>In these countries, a lot more women are educated and wealthy which would mean they aren’t doormats anymore unless you believe women are naturally submissive. Your post makes it sound like men are still the ones making all the decisions in these richer countries. (Am I wrong here?)

I think you're doing a weird kind of attribution here. I don't think women's propensity to be or not-be doormats changes with wealth and education all that much. My grandmother was a very strong, opinionated woman who never went to university. And my mother did go to university, got a Systems Engineering degree, and is kind of a doormat. I think it's much more a feature of early childhood experiences, predispositions, etc.

I think that unless a country has exactly 50-50 parity in political representation (which is not the case in the nordic countries as far as I know)... yeah, the men are the ones "making the decisions". At least, most of the big ones..? And in that case, they're still making half of the decisions. For women to be "making the decisions" they would need a MAJORITY of political power, perhaps even a supermajority.

And even then... all cultures have a lot of sexism in their history. The idea that "well, most women are well-educated and participate in the workforce, therefore sexism isn't a thing anymore" is kind of at the root of why I think this is a misunderstanding. After all, the study said:

>The Nordic Countries, which have a greater propensity towards #Feminism and have "more feminist" laws, have greater disparities than those poor countries in this list, when it comes to women's career paths and female STEM representation.
[NOTE TO SELF: FIND ACTUAL QUOTE FROM STUDY]

And then that gets turned into

>Countries that Have Achieved Gender Equality (they haven't, they're just closer than other places along a few very specific measurements that can be misleading) have women Choose(tm) Differently, in More Stereotypical Ways.

And then this is a "paradox" because "well, obviously if the feminist hypothesis that oppression is bad and keeps people from careers was true, then the More Feminist places would have more women in STEM. They don't, so that hypothesis must now be falsified."

Putting aside how frequently this is used as a tool by regressives to justify not-trying-to-get-more-women-into-STEM (which is still weird to me tbh, I mean, if you want more people in STEM then it should be worth it), the problem with that interpretation is that it's very unidimensional. How "feminist" or "oppressive" a society is... is measured along basically one axis, sometimes a compound axis sometimes not. And that's... not how society works.

You could imagine some society X, that demands women always wear certain clothing or will shame them (or even throw them in prison!). And that same society could also have a system of talent-finding for their school systems that was gender-blind, and simply found kids with good test scores and gave them lots of resources, assigned to them by a number such that the bureaucrat in question never knows if a child is male or female when making some call.

You could imagine some society Y, that lets women dress however they want to dress, but has a system of talent-finding for their schools that is basically "the teachers tell someone and then the kid gets those resources". If the teachers are sexist, then they might dismiss a young girl with the same test scores as a young boy, because she "got lucky" or something.

Society X "polices women's bodies" and "tells women what to wear". Society Y "systematically undermines the education of gifted young girls". Let's say that in society X, women can't have access to safe abortions and contraception, but there's universal Pre-Kindergarden, or a collectivist culture such that most families live in houses that have grandparents they can leave the kids with. In society Y, they have access to contraception and abortions, but not universal pre-K, and so usually one parent has to stay home with the kids for ages 0-4 or 0-5, which is usually the mother.

Which society is more sexist?

Measure "policing of women's bodies", and society X tells women what to wear and that they can't have sex without the risk of pregnancy.

Measure the "social costs of womanhood" or something like that, and society Y doesn't encourage female prodigies in schools, and basically creating a motherhood penalty for women in the workplace.

How "feminist" a society is does not depend on one thing. It depends on a lot of things. I would imagine that if Society X was poorer and had a bad reputation, and if Society Y was richer and had a good reputation, people would flock to say that society X is waaaaay more sexist, and society Y is waaaay more progressive. But I would also imagine that if you were a woman living in society X who had a really great talent for math at an early age... you would be much more likely to actually become a mathematician, than if you were a woman like that in society Y.

PART 2:

>These richer countries would’ve had rich, educated women that would’ve brought up their children more equally. Why isn’t that upbringing sending more boys into arts and “girly” fields , and more girls into STEM even though the kid are presumably being encouraged to do as they desire without many gender constraints. These countries have a lot less of “Jess, you’re gonna make a man happy one day and devote your time to raise his kids for a happy life” rhetoric and a lot more of the “Jess, you can kick ass and do whatever you want, girl” rhetoric. This means that kids in these countries are having less of a pressure to prefer certain jobs and their passion for a career choice is more natural.

This is also unidimensional.

I explained in my other[edit: the first one I linked to] post why this isn't a "more natural" situation (computer science jobs are equally unnatural in every country and culture, and incentives matter). So instead of rehashing that argument, I'm going to tell you a story, as a person with a uterus, about my life.

When I was 8 years old, I wanted to be an inventor and a mathematician. I was doing grade 10 math when I was in grade 5. Everyone knew I was good at it, everyone agreed that I would do well in university, and everyone was impressed with my ability to do high school math in my head before I was 12.

Then I moved from Venezuela to Canada, and that stopped. Nobody cared that I was good at math. Nobody encouraged me in school. I got good grades, and that was kind of impressive for the first few years since it was all in my second language and I could barely do more than ask someone to tell me the time in English on my first day of school.

My math talent eventually rusted after years of coasting math class on easy mode because I knew everything for four years, and I never actually learned calculus because I didn't finish high school math, because I couldn't learn anything in the last couple of years, because I hadn't practiced how to learn new kinds of math in four years. There was even a teacher who gave four of the boys in my classroom more advanced math because they got good grades... but not me. Even though I got comparable grades. Until I demanded it. And then I changed schools, so it wound up not mattering anymore that I got one harder math problem in one class two weeks before then.

For all of my high school experience, everyone insisted that I would go to art school or something. I was encouraged to do "whatever I wanted", but when I did something good in woodshop... nobody cared. When I painted something well, I was praised. When I did something good in science, nobody cared. When I did something good in literature, I was praised. I have always been a fairly interdisciplinary in my interests, but when they were "feminine" (or "more feminine" than woodworking and math) they were praised. When they weren't... they weren't.

I recently graduated university with a double-major in Philosophy and Psychology (a notoriously female-dominated field), and I did that because the material came easy to me and because people told me I was very good. And I listened to them, and I did those things that made them say that.

If I had grown up in Venezuela, in what is a fairly sexually objectifying culture where girls get breast implants at 15, "Miss Universe" is the equivalent of the Superbowl, and not being beautiful enough as a woman feels like a kind of failure of character... I probably would have been a mathematician, or an engineer, or a physicist. Not because Venezuela doesn't have weird shitty sexism, but because the weird shitty sexism wasn't of the type that made people dismiss my math ability.

I finished doing my growing up in Canada, though. And I was told time and again that I should "do what I love", and that I should "follow my passion". And if you ask... sure. I'm passionate about philosophy, even though every day I spend unemployed tells me that actually I'm an idiot for following that advice and trusting the people who told me that. But I also loved math. I also loved art. I loved a bunch of things, because lots of kids love a bunch of things. I did was what was nourished within me, by the society around me. The society that didn't feature cab-drivers that cat-called me at age 13 (unlike Venezuela). The society that didn't feature an unhealthy obsession with female beauty through plastic surgery as a form of national pride. That "less sexist" society.

So... I don't buy the "more natural choices" hypothesis. I think that, even getting out of my own "money" hypothesis, and sticking within the question of sexism, Canadian sexism is a lot more effective than Venezuelan sexism at pushing young women into non-STEM careers even when they want a STEM career as children, even when they would be good at a STEM career, even when with the other hand they're going "GIRL POWERRRR!!!" and "GIRLS IN STEM".

Because the 15 minutes with that one female engineer at a fair one weekend does not undo the day-to-day reinforcement of nobody giving a shit when I made several projects on a lathe, up to and including a TROPHY for a friend, but a sufficiently pretty drawing impresses people. Everyone got annoyed when I grabbed a dead tree to make a project out of... but paintings, or stories, or music, people loved. And the reverse applies too. I have a male friend who loves literature and has been writing for maybe slightly less time than I have. And not only did it take until UNIVERSITY for him to stop hating on English class, but... I don't think any authority figure really encouraged him to write. But they encouraged him to pursue neuroscience, even though he's complete shit at biology. They also encouraged him to pursue computer science, even though he also kind of sucks at it and doesn't seem to enjoy it very much. And now he has a comp-sci degree, and I have a double-major in philosophy and psychology. At least he's also unemployed...

Passion does not occur in a vacuum. And the society that encourages you to do what you're GOOD AT and not what you're "passionate about" (like Venezuela, like Iran) is one that is less susceptible to "women being more passionate about xyz", which is really code for "women having spent the vast majority of their sapient lives having xyz-like behaviours rewarded and non-xyz-like behaviours dismissed or punished". I "did what I was passionate about". And if I had lived a slightly different life in a different "more sexist" society, I would have ALSO done "what I was passionate about" and that what would have been math, not philosophy or psychology.

>Cuz here’s the thing about your point about SAHMs. In that example, its almost assumed that men are rich and their wives seem to be dependent on them. That used to happen back in the days but isn’t the case anymore because, like I mentioned, the wealth discrepancy between men and women is a lot lower in these places. This means that women CAN and ARE making their own choices.

Again with "their choices". Choices are not made in a vacuum. If person A wants to work and person B wants to work, and one has to stay with the child, the question of "which one is it?" is going to depend on a.) who makes the most money, b.) whose career "can take the hit" more, c.) who is better at caring for the child, and more.

This isn't a situation where the woman gets a veto. This is a situation where two people try to figure out what the best decision is. And usually, when the man doesn't have a lot of experience with children, or doesn't a job that pays significantly less... the woman stays with the kid. Even if she doesn't want to. Even if she "gets to choose" whether or not she does. This is even more specifically the case in the nordic countries, at least one of which provides one year(maybe more?) of parental leave to be distributed between the two parents at will, instead of one year of mother's leave and one year of father's leave, meaning that they have to make those choices together.

Your whole interpretation of this just seems fairly unidimensional. Society, and people, are more complicated than "gets a free choice" vs "doesn't get a free choice".

>Why isn’t there a huge resurgence of SAHDs (I’m guessing there isn’t) in these countries where financial problems aren’t as common?

I'm kind of confused by this question. No, it's not a huge resurgence, it's just... my point was that if you can't afford them, you won't have them. Not that if you can afford them (as a society) you will have a large quantity of them. This is more about the ways in which sexism becomes less feasible to enforce when you need everyone to carry their weight in a sufficiently poor society.

>Yes the “payoff” might not be as high for these women as it is for a Irani woman, but a lot of people choose their career based on their passion. If these women were passionate about STEM, they’d pursue it because the barriers they face are a lot less even if it’s still a boys club. Isn’t following your interests and passion enough of a payoff to go into STEM fields considering there really isn’t that many barriers compared to the ones women face in poorer countries. Also, a lot of the men in these countries are presumably less sexist because they’ve been brought up in a more equal society. So why would it be such an issue for a woman to work in a male dominated field?

I think that I already addressed this in my whole ramble about passions. Namely: Passions don't occur in a vacuum, they're not a magical letters in secret envelopes inside your heart that you open just before you declare a major in university. Passions are GROWN, when you practice doing something a lot, when you enjoy it, and when you get positive feedback from those around you.

So I will instead focus on your last question: "If these men are less sexist, what's the problem with being a woman in a male-dominated field?"

And... the problem is that it's annoying. If most social interactions people have are due to classes and not extra-curriculars, your university life is the experience of being surrounded by prospective suitors. Every interaction with a non-married or non-gay man can turn from "normal interaction between colleagues" to "weird fuckery" really quickly in that situation, which is a very precarious position to be in.

On top of that, in most societies most people are raised differently because of their gender, including supposedly egalitarian societies. Most women's communication styles, due to that socialization, tend to be different than most men's. This makes being a woman in a male-dominated field... kind of lonely and weird. Yes, there will be awesome guys who can be amazing friends to you, but... most interactions will not be with someone who knows you that well, they will be causal interactions with random coworkers, where confusing friction can arise.

Even if the men in Scandinavian countries are sufficiently enlightened to not make it stressful... offices and workplaces are much more than just whether people sexually harass you and whether you are paid unjustly or persistently dismissed when you seek seniority. A male dominated area is going to have a lot of random norms that just arise from it being male-dominated. For example, if watching sports is deemed a "masculine" thing (and I have no reason to believe it's not in the nordic countries, same with cars, which seem to be coded masculine in most of "the West"), and male-dominated spaces are ones in which people are expected to talk casually about shared interests... Well, better pick up two-to-four new hobbies to be able to interact with your coworkers. Not only that, but if you're an otherwise feminine woman in a male-dominated field, most of your hobbies will be foreign to them. They may be very nice and willing to entertain you, but they won't be able to hold their end of a conversation with you.

There's the very real possibility of just... shutting yourself out of the social life of the workplace, or having to shove yourself into things you're not interested in to avoid that. That's a cost. It's a cost to feel weirdly isolated from your coworkers and classmates, it's a cost for social interactions to be more precarious, it's a cost to have to put time and energy into things you're not interested in to be able to blend in. It's a cost that makes itself fairly well-known in the first and second years of a degree, when people usually change majors.

And if you think "well, if you're Passionate Enough, that shouldn't matter"... well, a.) that's why there's still SOME women in those fields, but also b.) most people aren't that passionate. Most engineers didn't want to be an engineer ever since they were little. Most biologists didn't have a burning drive towards biology when they were six months old. Passions are built. People get discouraged. Hence the many "leaky pipelines" in math and the hard sciences when it comes to young women not-completing-their-degrees.

Most people who have STEM careers don't have them because of passion, they have them because of pragmatism and ability. Demanding that the lowest bar for female engineers is "willing to shoot her social life in the foot for a chance to be an engineer", whereas the lowest bar for male engineers is "kinda likes engineering and thinks it's a good idea to pursue as a job"... is sexism. You should be able to be a not-that-passionate female engineer, just like not-that-passionate male engineers exist. And if the threshold is presented as being that much higher for the women... it's not a surprise when there are fewer of them.

And sure, you can say "well, there are other ways to have an active social life" even though most friends people make in adulthood come through their jobs, and there ARE other ways (though fewer IRL, in a progressively more secular and global society), but... that's another layer of shit-to-do. It's another set of costs. If having a "girlier" career means an easier life... more people for whom that is true will choose it regardless of their aptitude towards other careers. People who COULD HAVE easily been engineers end up majoring in psychology, or biology, or languages, instead, to avoid those costs.

This is all to say that I believe the typical interpretation of this study to be kind of... essentialist. Viewing complicated social phenomena as unidimensional things that you can just run Pearson's R on. It relies on a notion of a "natural" or "real" preference that doesn't exist (there aren't sensory biases for careers in computer sciences vs linguistics, and the most replicated cognitive difference between men and women can be trained away in a dozen hours). It relies on the idea that countries with smaller wage gaps and better harassment laws are just... unilaterally "less sexist" (instead of being less sexist ALONG ONE Of MANY AXES). It relies on this idea that social forces can't shape someone's decisions unless they're persistently getting harassed out of places, when there is also the question of what they are rewarded for in early childhood. And it generally just seems to be an over-generalization of a very narrow phenomenon made up of a lot of different parts.

Throughout history, people have said "women can't do X" and "women just don't want to do X" over and over and over. And then... things changed. And more women went into the army, more women went into university, more women went into education (which is a stereotypically female field now, but didn't use to be). Because women are people, and different people want different things, and if you broaden their options some of them will take some of the new options. We have no reason to believe that the results Scandinavia got when it got less sexist along some axes over a few decades will be "peak equality". We have no reason to think that current disparities in sex distribution across different fields are the "natural" version, when most of the fields currently dominated by women just weren't 50 years ago. They changed. They can change again, and again, and again.

I will close with this: Brave New World, the famous dystopian novel, begins by throwing you face-first into the baby-factory. In that first chapter, Huxley explains through some exposition that humans don't reproduce through pregnancies anymore, and how that works, to a handful of young students. This is basically a lecture on developmental biology. Have you ever seen a developmental biology classroom? It's like 90% women. And there is not a single woman among the students. Even though pregnancy is not a thing, even though there is now a recognized third gender-caste of people with uteruses who are infertile because they are bombarded with testosterone during development, who (if we're going to go by biodeterministic bullshit) should have exactly the same propensity towards "object-centric reasoning" as men do. Not a single woman. Because Aldous Huxley didn't think to include women in that biology class. Because it seemed "natural" to him that women wouldn't be in that class. Because it was the 1930s and he could imagine a society with three recognized genders (well, two and a half ish?), but not one in which women are most of the biology majors (as is the case today).

I think about that every time someone tells me that some distribution of sexes in careers and fields of study is just "natural" because women... something. It's not. It just seems natural, because we are blind to our context. And in 90 years, someone is going to read one of those op-eds about that study, or a reddit thread in an archive, or something, if the species is still alive. And they're going to go "they thought X was masculine/feminine?! People in the past were so weird!"

Because so, so, sooooo much of this shit is just arbitrary contingent historical circumstances that will change over time whether we want them to or not.
